What I'm going to do today is give a
very different uh talk than what I
usually do. Um Nicholas asked me to uh
kind of be uh you know get on the edge
more. And so I'm I'm going to do that
today. Typically I'd spend about 45
minutes on the biology and either not
mention consciousness at all or mention
it at you know a little bit at the end.
And so I've I've sort of flipped that
and a large part of what I normally
discuss on the biology end uh I'm I'm
going to skip and we can talk about it
in Q&A or you can find it in um at this
at this at our lab website here or many
other places. And so uh you know it's
it's a little um intimidating to be
talking about consciousness to people
who are experts in in the field because
typically my lab does not work on
consciousness per se. We work on
different aspects of unconventional
intelligence. But I'm going to go out on
a limb here and uh say a few things and
and see what see what you think. So uh
just to tell you up front, what I do not
claim is to have a new theory of
consciousness. Uh nor do I have
definitive data uniquely supporting a
specific theory of consciousness. But
here are some things that that I do
claim. First of all, uh we've expanded
the use of tools and both both both
bench tools and conceptual frameworks
from uh cognitive and and neuroscience
way outside of that domain. And so we've
applied it them to all sorts of other
things. And this has led to new
discoveries and new capabilities. In
other words, it's had empirical
fertility not not in the not question of
philosophy or linguistics, but actually
of discovering new things. And so I
think I think that's actually quite
useful and helps us to uh to to think
about very diverse kinds of minds in in
other other embodiment. I also think
that if you use any of the typical
criteria that we use to ascribe
consciousness to each other, be they um
joint cellular mechanisms or problem
solving observable behaviors or
evolutionary relationships or maybe you
like microtubial dynamics or specific
kinds of causal architectures as
evidence of consciousness in each other.
um then for the exact same reasons we
are going to have to take very uh very
seriously the possibility of
consciousness in our other body
structures and that is basically a
stepping stone to asking more broadly
what other kinds of of very diverse um
embodiment could be relevant to the
study of of consciousness. So I think we
can we can we can get there uh step by
step by first considering the reasons
that one might or might not uh assign um
at least at least some some plausibility
to consciousness outside of the brain in
our own bodies. But more broadly I think
that uh issues around AI and and meth
many many uh ethical problems are not
going to be resolved if we maintain a
focus on humans, a focus on 3D space for
embodiment. uh if we view the brain as
necessarily privileged in some way and
if we try to maintain crisp binary
categories of being conscious or not I
think all all of these things are
preventing progress in this field and I
will uh talk about why I think that is
and towards the end I'm going to say
some uh some some really I think
controversial things about uh what I
think this all means for consciousness
and basically the idea that I think
physics and evolutionary history do not
tell the whole story of of what's going
on here and I'm going to uh show you a
model that in some ways is a very
ancient model and in other ways I think
now is in a a much different place. So
uh so so first I'm going to talk about
the framework the approach that we take
to these kinds of problems and I think
it's it's really uh analogous to what's
happened in our understanding of
electromagnetism. you know, prior to
having a good theory of
electromagnetism, uh, first of all, we
had all kinds of diverse phenomena, um,
static electricity, lightning, light,
magnets, and so on that people thought
were fundamentally different things. And
so having a good theory allowed us to
see that no, they're actually different
uh aspects of the same underlying thing.
And also it enabled us to create
technologies that allow us to operate at
uh areas of this of the spectrum to
which we were previously completely
blind and unable to participate. In
other words, the only a tiny region was
available to us because of our own
evolutionary history. And I think this
is exactly what's going on with um uh
our mind blindness and our uh really uh
inability to to envision and to
recognize all kinds of very diverse uh
intelligences all around us. And I think
we need to create these kinds of
enabling technologies much as we did
here to uh to enable us to recognize and
interact with these other beings. So um
this is you know this is this is uh the
sort of the sort of picture that that
underlies a lot of thought in the field.
Um it's an an old piece of art called
Adam names the animals in the garden of
Eden. And I think um there's there's
something deeply wrong and then also
something deeply correct about this this
uh this this this view. What's wrong
here is that it suggests that there are
uh very clearly delineated natural
kinds. So, so here are the different
animals. These are familiar kinds of
things that are easy for us to recognize
as as having some kind of mind. And
Adam, of course, is different in a way
from all of these. And it suggests that
this is this is the sort of thing we
need to we need to understand. And once
we've got all of these, then then then
we're done. And I think this this is
going to have to profoundly change. But
what's interesting about this is that in
these um in this in this ancient kind of
biblical story, the idea was that uh
Adam had to be the one to name the
animals. In other words, God couldn't do
it. The angels couldn't do it. It had to
be Adam that named them. And in these uh
old traditions, the idea of naming
something means that you've discovered
its true inner nature. Right? That's the
the the kind of the deep meaning of
giving something a name. And I think
this is this is profound for us because
I think we are going to have to name in
this sense of discovering the inner
nature a whole variety of novel beings
with whom we are going to share our
world. And so so I think that's just
just as was true for Adam. And so I
think we we're trying to develop some
tools for uh for making that easier to
do. And one important thing to that that
I think is is is true is that because of
our understanding of evolution and
embryionic development that where on
different time scales we all start as a
single cell and then we become this uh
typical human that features prominently
in philosophical discussions of uh of
philosophy of mind. Uh we now know that
this is a slow and gradual process on
both time scales. And so I would claim
that the continuity thesis is the null
hypothesis. That is if if we think there
should be some sort of emergent phase
transitions and specific categories that
are just uh uh different than other
categories of beings here that that is
what needs very strong evidence. The the
the the baseline I think in the null
hypothesis should be a continuity and
the drive to develop uh models of
scaling and and so that we can talk
about what kind of consciousness and how
much not whether something is or isn't
consciousness. And I'll sort of hammer
this theme a couple of times in my talk.
Um now moreover whoa uh sorry I don't
know what's going on with this with this
visual here but um there is uh there is
another uh there is another uh spectrum
here another continuum which is the uh
gradual uh technological and biological
changes that can and and will and are
being applied to this kind of standard
human with this sort of special agential
glow. And it it be because biology is so
highly interoperable pretty much any uh
you know you can you can introduce
engineered material anywhere along the
scale and so you know questions of life
versus machines or what computers quote
unquote can and can't do. These these
are all very difficult now because of
the existence of these of these chimeas
and I think these are the difficult
cases that we need to talk about which
again speak to uh models of
transformation not sharp categories. So,
uh, in my, uh, in my framework, what I
try to do is, uh, create, uh, a way of
thinking about all of these different,
uh, agents, no matter what their, uh,
composition or province is. In other
words, we need to be able to think about
familiar creatures like primates and
birds and maybe an octopus and a whale
and things like that. But also very
weird creatures such as colonial
organisms, engineered new life forms, of
which I'm going to show you one today.
uh uh AIS whether purely software or
robotic maybe someday exobiological
agents and even something that I won't
have time to talk about today which is
which is even weirder still which are
which are actually um patterns within
media. Um I would like to I would like
to have a way of understanding what all
of these agents have in common and in
particular in a way that moves
experimental work forward. So it's this
is very important for us in our lab is
that whatever we say about these things
actually has to be um actionable in an
experimental way that shows us that why
thinking of of of of these things is is
is useful. But I also think it's
critical for better ethical frameworks
as we learn to recognize and relate to
these these unfamiliar kinds of minds.
And obviously I'm not the first person
to try for this. So here's Rosen, Bluth,
Weiner, and Bigalow with with their sort
of cybernetic um kind of ladder leading
up from from passive matter all the way
up to human metacognition. But uh but I
think I think we have a new way of of
thinking about it. And the sort of 1.0
version of that is uh is all described
here. So uh the fact is that all of us
made this journey. So we all started
life as a quiescent blob of chemicals as
an unfertilized OSA. Uh people tend to
think that that is well handled by the
laws of physics and chemistry and that
pres that you perhaps don't need um any
concepts from uh from cognitive or
behavioral science to deal with this.
But slowly and surely uh gradually
through the process of morphagenesis we
become something like this or even
perhaps something like this. And this
this uh journey from uh from from from
chemistry and physics to uh to the land
of psychoanalysis and and so on uh is is
gradual. By the way, this is not the
end. There are a number of interesting
things that can happen after that and we
can we can talk about uh talk about that
but but I think that developmental
biology offers no special point when any
of any of the things that are of
interest to to to uh to this group um
kick in. Okay. There there is there is
no special stage at which uh some sort
of um uh uh discrete u discreet thing
happens at least I'm I'm not aware of
any such. And the other the other
important thing about the architecture
of which uh of which we're made is that
we are all collective intelligences. We
are all made of parts uh that are
themselves quite competent. So here's a
single cell. Now this is a free living
organism but you get the idea. This is
one cell and it has no brain, no nervous
system. It is highly competent at its
own tiny little um cell level um
agendas. And you can you can ask the
question of of whether you can reward
and punish this. And I think most most
people will say you can. And in fact, of
course, you can do experiments where you
provide uh positive and negative
reinforcement and and so on. But um then
you have to remind uh remind yourself
that uh this thing here. So here's
another here's another unicellularial
organism. This is kind of a sad video.
What you're watching is uh is the death
of a minimal uh minimal being. So here
it is. So so this this poor guy is
falling apart into its constituive
parts. And what you see now is just uh
some chemicals. You see some some
chemicals that are quite different from
what it was uh just just minutes ago.
And so now we can ask the question, can
you in fact reward and punish a
collection of chemicals? Because that in
a certain sense is what we have here.
And with some time, if this was an egg,
with some time, you would have a being
that you certainly can reward and
punish. And uh what these things are all
made of are chemical networks. And by
the way, these chemical networks
themselves can learn. So uh just by
virtue of the mathematics that that um
governs collections of of chemicals that
turn each other on or off uh you find
that these kind of systems have at least
six different kinds of learning
including Pavlovian conditioning. So and
and we're using all this in the lab for
all kinds of interesting biomedical
applications such as drug conditioning.
But you can you can actually train the
material that is inside the cells
themselves. So what I'm painting here is
a picture of a uh of a collective
intelligence um stack where the material
I've called it an agential material. It
goes all the way to the bottom of um of
collections of chemical networks that uh
have behaviors that would be recognized
by people who work on uh in behavioral
science. And in fact this is this is a
very recent uh the recent data. In fact
it turns out that as you as you train
these things their causal emergence goes
up. Sometimes it goes up gradually,
sometimes it goes up in in spurts where
they in fact um fall asleep or sort of
disband into their collective subunits
in between uh the interactions you have
with them. The activity doesn't stop.
They're they're they're highly active
the whole time. But actually the causal
emergence falls when you're not talking
to them. So they can't keep themselves
awake, so to speak. But as you as you as
you train them in particular in an
associative conditioning paradigm, the
um the the the the integration goes up
and up and up. Then you can find all
that here. So the material of which we
are made is itself has has significant
relevance to this problem of of minds
and unconventional um is to uh
understand how limited we are in terms
of recognizing embodiment. So we as
humans are obsessed with
three-dimensional space. We are pretty
good at recognizing medium-sized objects
moving at medium speeds in that space.
And so these kinds of things are are
pretty pretty easy for us to understand.
Uh however, biology has been navigating
other spaces long before we had nerve
and muscle that allowed us to explore
the three-dimensional world. So living
things navigate transcriptional space,
they navigate physiological state spaces
and they navigate anatomical morphus
space which is basically the journey
that that we took during embryogenesis
from being a single cell to um you know
whatever body shape we have now. And so
my point is that uh there are
unconventional beings that are doing
this uh perception action loop. They
have competency at problem solving. They
they strive for specific goals. They um
they I I I think they uh they they they
they
suffer and they do various various
things that we would find very relevant
to this problem in spaces that we can't
see. And that is that is critical just
like in the in the case of the
electromagnetism. That means that we
need to the it's on us actually the
responsibility is on us to develop tools
to be able to recognize and uh and think
about uh the lives and the the inner
lives in particular uh of beings that
live in spaces that are evolutionarily
we are not evolutionarily prepped for.
So the next thing I'm going to very
briefly talk about is one model system
that we study which is the collective
intelligence of morphagenesis. And this
is this is typically what I'd spend 45
minutes just just on this part and and
not do any of these other things. But I
think I think it's important for us and
um the the reason that it's important is
that it allows us it allows us to to to
start to think about uh how it is that
we might first of all uh extend uh ideas
from a cognitive and behavioral uh
science to other substrates and then how
we can actually in a very practical way
communicate with these beings uh and uh
and and discover new science. So uh the
the kind of basic foundational idea here
is that there's very deep symmetry
between the self-creation of bodies and
minds. And I think Turing understood
this. It's it's quite amazing that
somebody who is really um so so
interested in understanding intelligence
in different guises and and uh you know
machine intelligence and and computation
and things like that. He also wrote
wrote this amazing paper the chemical
basis of morphagenesis where he thought
about the question of uh how do embryos
uh self assemble from uh from from a
from a a soup of unorganized chemicals.
And I think the reason he was interested
in this in this question which at first
doesn't seem like it has a lot to do
with this I think he understood that
there's a deep um symmetry here. And in
fact, it turns out that uh what
evolution and developmental biology are
telling us is that uh all of the amazing
things that that brains do were actually
uh an evolutionary pivot of much more
ancient mechanisms by which uh
multisellular beings navigated
anatomical space. And we developed a
tool. I used to have my students do this
by hand, but now now we made a tool that
that that you can all try. You can take
a um the abstract of a paper in
neuroscience and what it will do is
every time it says neuron it just says
cell. Every time it says millisecond it
will say minutes or hours. Uh and with
very few uh similar shifts you have
yourself a developmental biology paper.
the symmetries are really um are really
quite um quite striking and I don't have
time today to show you all the examples
in which uh the collective intelligence
of cells during morphagenesis solves
problems navigates the space in a
contextsensitive way uh contains
memories of goals that it pursues I'll
show you a little bit of that um just a
couple of things to to uh to point out
some interesting ways in which the
collective intelligence of cells as it
navigates morphospace is doing all of
the things that we usually take to be uh
pretty pretty relevant evidence for um
for consciousness. First first of all uh
it has this really interesting top- down
um control structure where uh higher
level goal states eventually trickle
down and control the molecular biology
of what happens in the tissue. So so
here's an example. So regenerative uh
amphibians such as this axelottle what
happens is if you take a tail like this
and you graft it to the flank here what
happens is so here it is grafted over
time this thing will turn into a limb.
So so this whole thing gets remodeled
into a limb. Okay now notice something
very interesting. These cells up here
are tail tip cells sitting at the end of
a tail. Why do they turn into fingers?
There's nothing wrong with them. uh this
is this is uh lo locally there's there's
no issue but the collective not the
individual cells but the but the group
actually uh uh knows very well that that
having a a tail in the middle of the
body is not the correct goal state. So
that attempt to reduce error trickles
down to the molecular biology that that
is needed to turn tail cells into finger
cells. So this idea of uh of of uh
control of of low-level phenomena uh in
the service of higher level perhaps very
abstract goals that they know nothing
about is something that is not just is
not unique to voluntary motion and
things like that in in our conventional
brains. It actually is baked in all the
way down into uh the way our bodies are
uh are assembled. And so so this is an
example where the local order ends up
obeying a very high level plan. There's
another there's another profound thing
that unifies cognition and morphagenesis
which is that at any given moment uh we
cognitively don't have access to the
past. What we have access to are engrams
memory traces that uh that we have
formed uh in past uh instances of
ourselves as a compression of our past
experience. So you end up with this with
this kind of architecture uh this this
this kind of bow tie architecture where
uh there's an algorithmic encoder that
takes past experiences and sort of
squeezes it down into some sort of
memory uh that is in our brain or body.
But then but then there's has to be a
process of if you want to use those
memories of interpretation and this has
to be creative. I I don't think it's
algorithmic as this end is because
you've lost information. You don't
exactly know what your memories mean.
And I think this is a critical part of
being a conscious agent is being in
charge of constantly uh reinterpreting
your own memories. Maybe the same way
they were interpreted before, but maybe
not. And um all of this is described in
detail here. But notice that that living
bodies face the exact same problem. Uh
we get squeezed down into a bottleneck
which is the uh the egg and then we have
to decode. And under normal
circumstances, the decoding goes exactly
the way the encoding went. But it
doesn't have to. And this is why
anthrobots and zenobots and various
chimeas and all kinds of weird things
that we can make work because this is a
creative interpretation process. There
is no allegiance to what the information
meant before. You tell the best most
adaptive story you can tell now. So this
this process of creative confabulation
forwardlooking not not just a recall of
static information but forward-looking
reinterpretation of whatever you have.
Uh I think in our in our brain our
ability to do this comes from this
ancient need to reexpand your um the
genetic information that that you've
been given as opposed to uh to sort of
obey it in some sort of road fashion.
And this is why living things can do
amazing uh they they have incredible
plasticity. Uh I I won't have time to go
into this in detail but basically if you
want to if if you want to make a kidney
lumen and you happen to be given normal
size cells this is what you do. Cellto
cell communication 8 to 10 cells build a
thing. If you're given these enormous
cells that you've never seen before,
this is experimental perturbation that
makes the cells gigantic, no problem. It
will just take one of these gigantic
cells, bend it around itself using a
completely different molecular mechanism
than this, right? So, this is this is a
kind of intelligence that you see on IQ
tests. You here are some uh some some
objects you have. Use them in a new way
to solve a new problem that you've not
seen before. Yeah, no problem. these
cells figure out how to use
cytokeleletal bending to uh to create
the same large scale outcome using very
different molecular mechanisms and so
and so this kind of uh problem solving
uh requires us to ask how does the
collective intelligence hold together
and how does it know what it's supposed
to do. Now in in the one sort of
uncontroversial example that we have of
uh of of systems that uh try to
implement goals that that their
individual parts don't have. Right? So
the the cognitive glue in the brain is
electrphysiology. So we know that this
is this remarkable um architecture where
uh cells generate um electrical
properties which they do or do not share
with their neighbors in a dynamic
fashion. And that allows the network to
perform computations to pursue goals and
and and so on. And that's what uh that's
what underlies the fact that we are more
than the sum of our neurons. We know
things and we have goals that the that
individual neurons in our brain do not.
And it also means that you could start
to do this kind of neural decoding
project where if we could if we could
just read out the electrophysiological
signals and um decode them then then we
could uh we could basically understand
the goals, the preferences, the memories
of of the the cognitive content of that
being. It's it's supposed to be
literally in the electrophysiology.
Well, as I said before, um evolution uh
figured out this architecture long
before we had neurons or brains. Every
cell in your body has these ion
channels. Most cells in your body have
these electrical synapses. This is
highly conserved homologous machinery,
not merely um analogous. They are
actually evolutionarily homologous. And
so for for years now, we've been uh
operating on this hypothesis that we
could also learn to do decoding,
non-neural decoding to understand the
goals, the preferences, the problem
solving capacities of morphagenesis of
navigating not three-dimensional spaces,
which is what the nervous system does,
but actually navigating anatomical
space. And so we have uh we've developed
tools to read the biological states here
of individual cells. So the colors
represent voltage. These are voltage
sensitive dyes. These are not models.
These are the are simulations. These are
real um real biological data. This is a
frog embryo where you can see all the
electrical activity that's uh that's
going on. So you can we're we're
scanning this thing the way that um you
might um you might scan a brain. We do
lots of uh quantitative simulation to
try to understand at multiple levels of
description uh how these dynamics are
are changing all the way from the
molecular biology to tissue level
dynamics to uh trying to link them with
ideas in connection is the connectionist
um machine learning and also uh uh you
know dynamical systems theory and things
like that to try to understand pattern
completion. So regeneration as pattern
completion and so on. So, so, so we we
we use all the same computational tools.
And then more importantly than just
reading out those patterns, you want to
be able to rewrite them. And the way we
do this is not by applied electric
fields. There are no magnets, no
frequencies, no waves. We basically hack
the same interface that the cells are
already using to talk to each other. In
other words, we can control, you know,
at a molecular level the topology of the
network by controlling these electrical
synapses. And of course, we can turn
individual channels on and on, whether
that be optogenetics or drugs or
whatever. So, we have the ability to to
both read and write information into
this electrical interface as you would
in the brain. And when you do this, you
and I could show you, you know, dozens
of dozens of different examples. I'll
just show you one. When you do this, you
can communicate new goals. So, for
example, we can take RNA encoding a
particular potassium channel. We can use
that to establish a particular
bioelectrical state somewhere in the
early embryo. And we have one here uh
that encodes the message build an eye.
And when we do that in cells that are
going to become gut, sure enough, they
get the message and they build an eye.
Now, the way this works is uh not
because we are turning specific genes on
and off, although certainly genes are
are are changing their expression
levels. We're not talking to the gene
level. We're not talking to the stem
cells. We have no idea how to
micromanage an eye anymore than when I'm
talking to you. I don't know how and I
don't have to know how to rearrange all
the uh proteins in your synapses so that
you remember what I'm saying to you. You
will handle that on your own. We're
using a very thin interface. This
linguistic interface where I give a very
uh kind of highlevel uh message and the
receiving system because it is a
multiscale cognitive system takes care
of making the molecular biology fit. And
the same thing is happening here. All we
say is build an eye and then all this
lens, retina, optic nerve in the right
position, the right orientations, the
system takes care of all of that. We are
we are giving a very minimal highle
prompt. Now there's something
interesting that happens here. If we
inject only a few cells. So the blue
cells are the ones that we injected.
They will do the job of uh trying to
recruit their neighbors to participate.
We don't have to tell them to do that.
The material is already doing it.
There's not enough of them to build an
eye. So they try to recruit these guys.
But these guys actually resist. They
have a cancer suppression mechanism that
says if your neighbor has a weird
voltage that's telling you to do
something strange, try to resist. In
fact, try to normalize them and make
sure they end up like you. So there's
this kind of battle of of of world views
going on here between this the these
cells that have bought into our message
and these cells that may or may not. And
I want to show you one kind of cute
example of of what that looks like. So
uh again the colors are are voltage
here. These are two frames first. No
notice notice that this uh this cell has
a particular voltage before it touches
these uh and then this is right after.
Look at that. The tiniest touch. And so
here's the video. So so it's coming
along coming along minding its own
business having its own voltage. This
guy reaches out. Boom. That's it. a as
soon as it touched it just a little bit
the voltage changes and now it becomes
part of this mass and it's going to do
things that the that the collective
wants to do. This is a very convincing
uh piece of biological data that takes
over basically takes over this and that
is that is exactly what we did when we
created that ectopic eye that I just
showed you. You can also do interesting
things like this. Um this is a
plenarian. These flatworms regenerate.
You can cut them into pieces. And this
middle fragment knows exactly how many
heads or tails it should have. And so
very reliably, it makes one head, one
tail. And it does so because there is a
a memory of how many heads you're
supposed to have, which we can read out
exactly as as you might do in a neural
decoding context. Here it is. And what
we can do is we can rewrite it. So So
we've made an animal that now has uh and
this of course a little messy. We're
still working out the technology, but
now it has it it has a pattern that says
two heads. And when we cut this guy,
sure enough, it makes a two-headed
animal. This is not Photoshop or AI or
anything. This is exactly what what they
look like. But notice something very
interesting. This biological map is not
a map of this two-headed animal. It is a
map of this anatomically one-headed
animal. In fact, the molecular biology
is normal. So, uh, anterior markers in
the head, not in the tail. So what
you're looking at here is the fact that
a single body can hold at least one of
two different representations of what a
correct plenarian will look like. In
fact, this is a counterfactual
representation because this is not true
right now. This is what you will build
if you get injured at a future time. And
if you don't get injured, then this
stays a latent memory. They the the
tissues ignore it until they get injured
and then they construct that then they
obey and construct what what this is.
So, so you can think about these very
very minimal and by the way, as any good
memory, it's permanent. So, if you take
these two-headed animals and keep
recutting them, they will continuously
rec re regenerate as two-headeds even
though we haven't touched the genetics.
So, this ability to to to change your
your memory without changing the
hardware. So, normal normal genome, but
now a completely different uh body plan
uh architecture and the ability to store
patterns that are not reflective of
what's true right now that is past or
future but not not right now. I think
these are basil model systems for some
of the amazing things our brains do in
terms of the time travel that they can
the mental time travel they can do and
so on. Okay. So I'm uh so so what I've
shown you uh so so far is that we can
start to think about uh somewhat alien
minds by looking at a situation where
the system is navigating a space that is
very hard for us to visualize. So this
kind of anatomical morphus base, but it
has the advantage that all of the
mechanisms that it's using to do this
are homologous to what our brains use to
do the things that we do. So I think
this is a nice stepping stone. It's a
nice way before we start thinking about
aliens and you know all kinds of weird
um intelligences, we can start uh kind
of sharpening our tools here. Here's
something that's using the exact same
machinery uh to do this in a space
that's hard for us, right? So that's
that's why I think it's a good it's a
good model system. So I want to move on
from this to a synthetic morphology
model because what I've shown you so far
are systems whose uh goals in anatomical
space are determined by evolution. So I
want to show you I want to show you uh
some zenobots and the way that they're
formed is that we take a frog embryo. Uh
we take some of these um some of these
prospective epithelial cells up here. We
put them in a dish. We dissociate them
here. We put them in the dish. Now
there's many things they could do. They
could die. They could walk away from
each other. they could form a
twodimensional cell culture layer.
Instead, what they do is they coalesce
into this little unit. And here, this is
this is kind of neat. Um, this is a
closeup. Each one of these little
circles is a single cell. So, you see
this little group of cells. Doesn't hurt
that it looks like a little horse. I I
just think this is this is cute. It um
moves over and it sort of has some some
interactions with this. You see a little
calcium flash here. I'll get to the
calcium momentarily. So, the individual
cells do these kind of things. Then they
then they sort of coales into this and
then you get this uh little little
motile creature. It has psyia on its
outer surface. It uses them to propel
through the water. It can go in circles.
It can patrol back and forth like this.
It they have uh kind of collective
dynamics that they do. Here it is um uh
traversing a maze. So this is still
water. There's no there's no flow. There
are no gradients. It takes the corner
without bumping into the wall. And then
at this point it spontaneously turns
around to go back where it came from.
These are not like the biobots people
make out of muscle cells where you have
to pace them and you control where they
go. This thing is completely autonomous.
Uh I'm not making any claims yet about
their level of intelligence. We're
testing all that. We have some
interesting data on their memory
formation and so on. Uh or what goals
they have or their consciousness. Not
making any claims about that because you
I I don't think you can tell any of that
from just from observations of behavior.
However, uh we can start doing some
interesting things. So this is this is
calcium signaling. Remember, there are
no neurons here. There's just basically
perspective skin cells. Um, but what you
can do is look at the calcium signaling
in these guys. And just just to focus on
one of them, it's also interesting if
they're talking to each other. We don't
know that yet, but um but just just to
look at one, we can we can look at the
connectivity that we see and use the
kind of tools that uh that are used to
analyze brain connectivity and in
particular to analyze things like
integrated information. So to compare uh
this uh this FIR of of our zenobots with
the null models as people do in fMRI
data, right? And this is work of Thomas
Barley and Josh Bongard's lab and PI in
my group. Uh start to look at what what
what exactly is the same and what's
different uh as as what these kinds of
metrics tell you about brain signaling
in the brain and and beyond. And and if
you do see things like this, you get an
interest, you know, you have to answer
an interesting question. Do we do we
learn from what the uh from what the
method is telling us or do we somehow
sort of by fiat assume that it's just
income um doesn't apply here for
whatever reason that we've we've
stretched these things beyond where they
need to be applied and if so why uh so
so clearly I don't I don't think that I
think these applying these methods here
is is is quite informative now um they
have all sorts of interesting behavioral
capacities for example if you give them
loose um epithelial cells what they do
is they run around and they collect
into little little balls. And because
they themselves are working with an
aential material, these little balls
mature to be the next generation of
xenobots. Guess what they do? They run
around and they make the next
generation, which makes the next and so
on. So, um, we call this kinematic
replication. As far as we know, no other
creature on Earth reproduces this way.
It's a little bit like Vonoyman's dream
of a robot that makes copies of itself
from stuff it finds in the in the
environment. Uh, we certainly didn't
teach them to do that. This is this is
spontaneous. I don't think any other
creature um does this or or has in the
in the lineage. And we can do one other
one other interesting thing. Um we can
ask uh what their transcripttos look
like. What do what does this novel novel
being uh what what what genes do they
express? Well, it turns out that they
express hundreds of new genes that their
uh original
age matched embryos do not express. And
lots of interesting stuff here. among
these genes is a cluster of genes
related to hearing or sensitive sensory
perception of sound. So, so um basically
we decided to test this and pi put a
speaker underneath these guys and and
cause some um uh some some sound and
vibration. And what we basically see is
that they they respond they actually you
can you can tell from their from their
behavior that they actually react to
these stimuli in ways that actually
embryos do not do. So this is novel.
These are novel gene expressions, novel
behaviors such as kinematic
self-replication and responding to sound
stimuli that that the original material
does not do. And so this raises an
interesting question and I and I'll
explain why why I think this is relevant
to to consciousness work. uh what you
would typically say is that the frog
genome over the years of uh of of
interactions with the environment has
produced this kind of a things the
developmental stages tadpoles you know
that have certain behaviors but it also
produces zenobots with their own weird
developmental sequence and behaviors
that uh have have never existed before.
There's never been any zenobots. There's
never been any selection to be a good
zenobot. And so one wants to ask the
question, we know when the computations
were done to to derive a frog, a frog
embryo. It was done for the eons that
that this genome has been budding up
against the environment. When were the
computations done to figure out how to
be a good xenobot? Because that's never
existed. And you might say that well, it
has sort of happened at the same time as
as as you evolved a frog, but that of
course undermines the whole specificity
of environment to outcome. That's kind
of the point of evolutionary theory is
that there should be very tight
specificity between what you're selected
for in your environment and what
actually happens in the end. So, so now
this this raises an interesting question
in anthropots and zenobots. Where do
their goals come from? We could say that
the goals of these creatures, anatomical
goals, physiological set points,
transcriptional set points, and so on
come from a history of selection. You
can't say that for these. Where do they
come from? Where do the cognitive uh and
and other capacities of so so the the
forms of of body and of behavior where
do they come from if it's not going to
be a history of selection? And so now
here's the kind of the the weirdest part
of the talk where I'm going to say some
uh some kind of uh uh out there things
and and we can all we can all decide on
what we think. So the the first thing to
realize is that there are patterns that
are not set by either physics or
history. So what you're looking at here
is something called a Halley plot and
then I've made I've made kind of videos
of them that basically comes from uh
plotting this formula in complex
numbers. It's very short very simple but
this is the kind of richness that this
encodes if you know how to look at it
and the particular shape of this thing.
There is no fact of physics that sets
this. There is no uh evolutionary
history that tells you why this is the
case. The explanation for why or or for
why this is the way it is comes from the
properties of mathematical objects. It
is and and so this is I'm gonna I'm
going to kind of push on this on this
concept for for a few minutes. This idea
that there are specific patterns in
mathematical objects that are neither
determined by physics nor by any kind of
evolutionary history. There is another
source. Biologists don't like to think
about that. Biologists would like
everything in biology to be explained
either by some necessity of of physics
or by an evolutionary history of of
selection. But that is clearly not the
only um game in town. And so um what I
would like to suggest the following uh
the following hypothesis
uh that basically what's happening is
that uh is is what plaintist
mathematicians think is happening which
is that there is another space an
ordered structured space of truths that
are not determined by any facts of the
of the physical world. they are sort of
independent in that sense but of course
they affect the things that do happen in
the physical world and that what they're
doing is exploring this space uh in a
systematic um structured way and so this
these these patterns are uh they have a
they have a causal influence on the
physical world they uh in physics we see
them as constraints in biology I think
we actually see them as enablements I
think we call biology systems that are
actually making use of some of these as
as free lunches and so my hypothesis is
is this basically what I'm taking is
extending this which is you know there
are many mathematicians that already
believe this. I'm extending this in the
in the following way. I think this this
world of forms or the platonic space or
the latent space or whatever you want to
call it contains low agency patterns
like facts about numbers and logic and
the you know the truths about the prime
numbers and things like that. But also
it contains more complex active patterns
that behavior science behavioral
scientists would recognize as kinds of
minds. And so what what I what I think
is happening is that the relationship
between uh mind and body is basically
the same relationship as between truths
of mathematics and physical objects
because that space contains not just
mathematical facts but actually
behavioral propensities or or or kinds
of minds. And so uh there are two
implications to this. First of all that
I think that whatever we build be it uh
machines, robots, biobots, embryos,
bodies, organs, whatever whatever we
build these are basically interfaces.
They're frontends. They're like thin
clients for uh for these patterns that
ingress into the physical world and have
a huge impact on what actually happens.
And I think well the first implication
is that biologicals are not the only
interfaces for this. I think this stuff
is pervasive. I think it it goes all the
way down to the bottom. It is not just
the the biological bodies that have the
adv um the the the advantage of being
able to host these kinds of these kind
of patterns and I also think that we are
really bad as the scientific community
is really bad at predicting what is
going to ingress when you make these
kinds of things and I I'll briefly
mention an example in a minute but I
think this is this is very important for
uh the status of AIs and all this kind
of stuff because uh this I I do not
believe that we make intelligence either
biological or by or or technological I
think that what we make are interfaces
that um that basically enable some of
these some of these patterns to uh to to
come into the the physical world. Now,
at this point, most of you are probably
saying, well, interaction is is dead.
This was like killed off at the time of
Decart that that that you know, there's
this interaction problem. There's a
mental world and there's a physical
world. It just doesn't work to say that
there's some kind of uh external uh
external patterns that that are part of
the consciousness of of of beings. You
know, most people think that this has
been put to bed a long time ago. I think
that uh because of because of
mathematics, I think that physicalism
was already dead in Newton's universe in
the classical boring deterministic
universe. Uh you don't need quantum
mechanics for this as many people have
tried to sort of resurrect this with a
quantum mechanical interface. I don't
think you need any of that. Although
maybe that's true, too. I don't know.
But but because Newton's universe was
already sort of haunted by truths that
are not determined by anything that
happens in the physical world but in
turn affect uh what does happen uh I
think I think this was this was already
dead and I think the relationship here
so this is this is kind of a hypothesis
that I'm floating is that the way to
think about mindbody interactions is a
is is the same way that people think
about what how the truths of mathematics
determine physics and there are there
are lots of aspects of biology for
example cicada data has come out at
particular at 13 and and uh in 17 years
because of the way prime numbers work,
not because of anything in in in in
physics or biology. It it rests on the
the properties of prime numbers. And
Darcy Thompson's book on growth and form
in the 20s shows many amazing examples
of how biology makes makes use of this
stuff. And and so I think
epifenomenalism is as hopeless for
mathematics as it is for for models of
of mind. I think I I actually argue for
an interactionist
model. And so the final thing I I I want
to just bring up is this and I don't
have time to go into it in detail but
you can you can grab this paper and take
a look what what we found long and short
by looking at very minimal models in
particular here sorting algorithms. So
like bubble sort okay these are six
lines of code completely transparent
completely deterministic people have
been working on them for for many
decades. If you look at them the right
way you see that yeah they do the thing
they're supposed to do which is to sort
numbers but they also have these weird
side quests. uh that that we measured as
as clustering and some other properties
um that are basically nowhere in the
algorithm. In other words, uh the the
they have they have behaviors that would
be what again quite recognizable by
behavior behavioral scientists that are
not what the algorithm is forcing them
to do. Okay. And so I I think what this
means is that uh there is something else
besides chance and necessity. And this
is a way to to start thinking about um
uh what what significant minds do. This
is obviously very minimal that even
something as simplistic and dumb as a
sorting algorithm has is is doing things
that you neither prescribe for it to do
nor for nor for for forbaded from from
doing. And I think there's a lot of
humility necessary here because if we
don't understand bubble sort which I
think we haven't then I don't think we
understand language models or anything
like that. And and by the way, just to
mention, if you think the situation is
better in the in the neural sciences
where people think they know what parts
of the brain do and things like that,
we've gathered some some really
interesting examples of human clinical
data that really also suggests that in
some ways the brain is basically a thin
client uh because the mapping between
brain architectures and uh and and the
cognitive performance really breaks down
in certain cases. So my point my point
is this. Um I I think cognitive uh uh
ways of handling cognitive beings go all
the way down because neither digital nor
biochemical machines are what our formal
models say they are. You know McGreet
was reminding us this is not a pipe.
This is a um a depiction of a pipe. And
I think we need to remember here this is
not a touring machine. You know touring
machines have limitations. Um our formal
models of computers and computing have
limitations. But I don't think really I
don't think anything matches fully
matches these models. I don't think they
describe anything in the real world. Uh
they're their limitations and their
competencies are not fully um
describing the limitations and
competencies of uh systems either either
technological or biological. And I think
we have to we have to remember that. Um
and so so here's kind of a con a summary
of what I'm saying. I'm not sure there
are any dumb machines or dead matter at
all. Uh I think our ancient these these
kind of ancient categories that just
feed the mind blindness that we already
have. I think that in in making machines
and uh whether digital or analog, there
are things we force them to do such as
language which we force language models
to do. But unlike biology where the
thing they're doing and the
communications they're expressing are
very tightly linked, what these things
are doing may have very little to do
with their intrinsic motivations. In
other words, just like in that sorting
algorithm, we make it sort, but the
intrinsic motivation that it has to do
other things has nothing to do with the
sorting itself. And so we could really
be fooled by the fact that these things
speak. Uh I think language may be maybe
sort of a red herring as far as what any
of these things are actually doing. And
so these AIs, I I don't think they have
anything resembling a human mind, but
that doesn't matter. Neither does your
liver. They these things have other
kinds of minds. And by creating these
sorts of interfaces, we may be fishing
in a in a new area of that space that
has never had embodiment before. And and
that's a that's a different way of
thinking about it than this idea that
you are creating a new intelligence
whose u cog cognition is described by
the language that it that it speaks. I
think these two things might be very
decoupled. And I think that ultimately
uh we might end up talking about freedom
not about predictability or determinism
but really about the quality of the
ingressions that are operating uh at
this at this uh other level between um
chance and and necessity. And I think in
the future we need to uh uh focus less
on emergence as merely a catalog of
surprises that we didn't expect but a
systematic study of the structure of
that latent space of patterns of form
and behavior and to really try to work
out that relationship between the
structure of the physical pointer
meaning the embodiment and the uh the
patterns that are coming through it. And
I think zenobots and anthrobots and
various other tools including language
models and so on are exploration
vehicles because uh pretty much any
combination of evolved material,
engineered material, software and these
patterns which affect all of them are
viable beings and cyborgs and hybrids
and th this these are the kinds of
things that are really going to uh
challenge our our notions of of of
consciousness. And if we're going to
have an ethical synth biosis with these
things, we have to get better at
understanding uh minds outside of our
normal embodiment. And this is what I
think the future of Garden of Eden is
going to look like. It's going to be a
very weird place. But this is all this
is all coming. I mean, it's not going to
take long before um all we're surrounded
by beings that are that are radically
different. Um yeah, I'm going to I'm
going to skip I'm going to skip all this
and just to uh just to say that if
you're interested in in any of these
things, there are papers where where we
go into this in detail. And the most
important thing is to thank the uh the
postocs and the students who did the
work, our um our amazing collaborators,
uh our funders here that have supported
this work um over the years. And there
are three disclosures. Uh these are
these are companies that have licensed
some of our um stuff for various
purposes. So I'll stop here. Thank you
for listening.